JOHN YANG: Good evening. I'm
John Yang. Gwen
Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: In a
Memorial Day
tradition, President Obama lays
a wreath at
the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier
to honor fallen
service members.
Then: The Iraqi army, backed by
the U.S.,
battle Islamic State forces in
the key city
of Fallujah, trying to take back
the Iraqi
city seized by the terror group
two years
ago.
Also ahead: Following the twists
and turns
of the campaign trail, our
politics Monday
Team breaks down the most recent
developments
in the presidential election.
Plus, Pulitzer Prize-winning
poet Peter Balakian
grapples with his family's dark
past as survivors
of the Armenian genocide.
PETER BALAKIAN, Pulitzer Prize
Winner: One
of the reasons for my writing
"Black Dog of
Fate" was to try to make sense
of growing
up in a family in which a
traumatic history
was really repressed.
JOHN YANG: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: The battle to
recapture the Islamic
State's last major stronghold in
Western Iraq
has been joined in earnest.
Government troops
began pushing into Fallujah
today, after seizing
most of the city's outskirts in
the last week.
An Iraqi commander says the
fighting was fierce.
We will have a full report on
the battle after
the news summary.
In the day's other news:
Officials in Afghanistan
reported more than 50 police
killed in a string
of Taliban attacks, the first
since the group
named a new leader last week.
The militants
hit checkpoints in Eastern
Helmand Province,
killing 33 officers on Sunday,
and up to 24
others today. Residents in the
provincial
capital said artillery and
machine gun fire
could be heard close to the
city.
On this Memorial Day, President
Obama made
special mention of the Americans
who died
in the past year in Iraq and
Afghanistan.
It was the last time this
commander in chief
will lead the nation's
observances on a day
of time-honored traditions.
William Brangham has our report.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Every day, there are American
families who
pray for the sound of a familiar
voice when
the phone rings. Instead, a car
pulled up
to the house, and there was a
knock on the
front door, and the sound of
"Taps" floated
through a cemetery's trees.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thousands of
headstones
bore mute witness at Arlington
National Cemetery
today, as the president first
laid a wreath
at the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier, and then
spoke of the sacrifice they
represent.
BARACK OBAMA: If you look
closely at the white
markers that grace these hills,
one thing
you will notice is that so many
of years,
dates of birth and dates of
death, are so
close together.
They belong to young Americans,
those who
never lived to be honored as
veterans for
their service, men who battled
their own brothers
in civil war, those who fought
as a band of
brothers an ocean away, men and
women who
redefined heroism for a new
generation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: More than two
dozen American
service members have died in
Iraq and Afghanistan
since last Memorial Day.
The president today singled out
three of them,
all special forces troops killed
by Islamic
State fighters in Iraq, Navy
SEAL Charles
Keating IV, Marine Staff
Sergeant Louis Cardin,
and Army Master Sergeant Joshua
Wheeler.
President Obama also said
Americans, and the
government, must do more for
those who do
return home.
BARACK OBAMA: We have to make
sure our veterans
get everything that they have
earned, from
good health care to a good job,
and we have
to do better. Our work is never
done. We have
to be there not only when we
need them, but
when they need us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Amid the
ceremonies in Washington,
police locked down parts of the
White House
complex for a time, when someone
threw a suspicious
package over a fence. A woman
was later taken
into custody.
Elsewhere, annual parades and
tributes played
out across the country. In New
Castle, Delaware,
Vice President Biden took part
in ceremonies
naming the state National Guard
headquarters
for his son, Beau Biden, who
died last year
of brain cancer.
And Memorial Day also brought
thousands of
travelers to airports. There
were still long
security lines in some places,
but, for the
most part, delays appeared
shorter than before.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JOHN YANG: About 320 rescued
migrants and
refugees arrived at a port in
Sicily today.
JOHN YANG: About 320 rescued
migrants and
refugees arrived at a port in
Sicily today.
And something has happened in
Sweden that
had not happened since they
started keeping
records in 1749. The country now
has more
men than women. The Swedish
government's new
count is a rare (AUDIO GAP)
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Iraqi forces
advance on the ISIS-held city of
Fallujah;
our Politics Monday duo breaks
down the state
of the presidential race; a tech
mogul's fight
against Gawker generates a
fierce debate over
a free press; and much more.
against Gawker generates a
fierce debate over
a free press; and much more.
The Iraqi government, with
United States support,
stepped up the pace to retake
the city of
Fallujah. Iraqi military forces
stormed the
southern edge of the city, which
has been
controlled by ISIS since January
2014.
Iraqi tanks rolled down a main
road leading
into Fallujah, spearheading the
all-out push
to recapture the city. The
offensive to rout
ISIS militants began last week,
with government
forces advancing slowly to try
to minimize
civilian casualties. Government
officials
and aid groups estimate at least
50,000 people
are trapped in the besieged
city.
HADI AL-AMIRI, Badr Organization
(through
translator): Our advice to our
troops is to
treat families gently and
kindly, and to respect
them. Our advice to fighters is
to protect
and guard public and private
properties.
JOHN YANG: Fallujah, about 40
miles west of
Baghdad, is one of the Islamic
State's last
major strongholds in the region.
ISIS has
controlled it since 2014.
Ramadi, farther
to the west, was liberated at
the end of last
year. It was a major victory for
Iraqi forces,
but at a great cost. Much of
Ramadi was leveled
in the process.
Fallujah may now face a similar
fate. It's
being bombarded by Iraqi forces
on the ground
and the U.S.-led coalition from
the air. The
city is no stranger to
destruction. It was
largely ruined back in 2004,
after the U.S.
invasion and subsequent battles
with insurgents.
Maher Chmaytelli is the Reuters
bureau chief
in Baghdad.
MAHER CHMAYTELLI, Reuters: The
population
of Fallujah is -- is a
conservative population,
It's like an Islamic Sunni,
conservative,
has a Sunni conservative
background.
Historically, let's say, since
2003, since
Saddam was toppled, Fallujah was
very much
like a bastion of the insurgency
against first
the U.S. occupation of Iraq, and
later off
against the Shiite-led
governments that were
put in place after the removal
of Saddam.
JOHN YANG: Thousands have been
displaced by
the years of fighting, and some
have been
living in camps for two years.
They say conditions
in the city are desperate.
BAAHJET IBRAHIM, Iraq (through
translator):
Those who are inside cannot
leave and those
who are outside cannot help
them. I mean,
there is no food at all. A sack
of flour costs
more than $800. And you can't
even get it.
Now my relatives who are still
there have
paid 683 U.S. dollars for 44
pounds of rice
and flour.
JOHN YANG: There have been calls
for the government
to open a safe corridor for the
injured, elderly
and children to leave.
As Islamic State forces are
pressed in Fallujah,
they are striking back in
Baghdad. Mangled
wreckage was all that was left
of a suicide
bomber's car that detonated near
a commercial
area today, killing eight
civilians and three
soldiers.
MAN (through translator): By
launching such
attacks, the militants aimed to
thwart our
determination and resolution to
go forward
with our victories in Fallujah
and Garma.
Despite the casualties that we
have suffered,
we are ready to proceed with our
battles and
our military gains.
JOHN YANG: The targets in the
Iraqi capital
have been largely Shiites, and
the Shiite-dominated
government is feeling the heat.
MAHER CHMAYTELLI: Shia
politicians have been
pressuring the government to
take action against
Fallujah after the series of
bombings that
we have seen, especially over
the pats two
weeks. As soon as he announced
the offensive
on Fallujah, we have seen more
or less the
Shiite community rallying around
him, participating
in the battles.
JOHN YANG: Iraqi officials say
they have to
take Fallujah before moving on
to Mosul, the
country's second largest city.
The presidential candidates had
a relatively
low-key Memorial Day.
Hillary Clinton, who's closing
in on the Democratic
nomination, went back to the
town she now
calls home, Chappaqua, New York,
to march
in a local Memorial Day parade.
Bernie Sanders
spent today in California, the
big prize of
next Tuesday's primaries, and
possibly his
last stand. He marked the
holiday in San Francisco,
ahead of two events this evening
in Oakland.
Republican Donald Trump stayed
out of the
public eye today. But as of this
weekend,
he can now count a former
Republican governor
as a third-party rival. Gary
Johnson, who
was once New Mexico's chief
executive, ran
for president as a Libertarian
in 2012, winning
just about 1 percent of the
vote. On Sunday,
the party made him its nominee
once again,
and picked another former
Republican governor,
William Weld of Massachusetts,
to be his running
mate.
For more on all this and the
week ahead in
politics, we have Amy Walter of
The Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR.
So, Amy, Tam, reporters finally
got their
contested convention this
weekend. The Libertarians
went to two ballots. With both
Donald Trump
and Hillary Clinton, the two
major party nominees,
so unpopular, the Libertarians
are hoping
this is going be their big year.
Amy, what do you think?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
they got a couple of hurdles to
overcome.
The first is, I don't think a
lot of people
know anything about Gary Johnson
or William
Weld or what they stand for, and
so they are
going to have to figure out what
their message
is beyond just, I'm not Donald
Trump, I'm
not Hillary Clinton.
The second thing is, they have
got to figure
out how to raise money to get
that message
out and to get some attention.
And, finally,
they got to figure out if they
can get the
15 percent -- that's the
threshold that you
need to hit in major polls
leading up to the
first presidential debate to be
included in
those.
Now, we remember Ross Perot was
included in
the debates in 1992. I think
that, in 1980,
you had Anderson was included in
at least
one of those debates. But 15
percent is still
a very high bar. Without it, it
means that
they're not going to get a whole
much attention
later in the fall.
JOHN YANG: Can they still make
an impact?
Can they still have a difference
in this face?
People will still tell you if
they were do
wild calculations to say that
Ralph Nader
cost Al Gore the 2000 election.
But, Tam,
can they really make a
difference this year?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: And I
will say Ralph Nader continues
to disagree
with that assessment. But most
people feel
the other way.
In talking to voters out there,
you hear people,
you hear Republicans saying, I
can't vote
for Donald Trump. And maybe the
Libertarians
are a landing place, because
they are fiscally
conservative and they want
government out
of your life. Then you talk to
some Democrats.
I was talking to some Democrats
in Albuquerque
who are Bernie people.
But they -- if Bernie is not
there, rather
write in, they might vote for
Gary Johns,
they said. And they're -- the
Libertarian
platform is pro-marijuana, which
has in the
past attracted some subset of
younger voters
who get excited about.
So, they are not, as far as we
can tell -- and
things have been wild this year,
so subject
to change -- they are not
getting a huge influx
of voters necessarily.
JOHN YANG: You talk about the
Republicans,
the never Trumpers on the
Republican side.
They still keep talk be about
another candidate.
This weekend, we had that
tantalizing tweet
from Bill Kristol saying there
was going to
be another candidate. Are they
still looking?
Are they still trying to come up
with someone,
Amy?
AMY WALTER: There's still a
fringe part of
the never Trump movement.
Bill Kristol is leading that
charge. He's
the publisher of The Weekly
Standard, and
suggesting that there could be
another candidate
out there. As you said, there
was a sort of
cryptic tweet that over the
holiday weekend
an independent candidate is
going to come
out, he's going to be amazing.
Actually didn't
have a gender. This person is
going to be
amazing. Just wait until you see
who this
person.
We don't have the name of that
candidate yet,
but they have their own hurdles
as an independent
candidate. At least the
Libertarian candidates
have ballot access because of
their party
status. A third-party candidate,
in order
to get on the ballot, there is a
tremendous
level of work that you need to
do.
We have already had one state
where the deadline
has passed. That's Texas. North
Carolina is
in a week from now. You need
hundreds of thousands
of signatures, so it's not an
easy task to
overcome. But it goes to the
bigger point,
and this is what Tam brought up
too, which
is, what do these candidates who
feel like
neither candidate speaks to them
-- if you're
a Republican who just can't vote
for Donald
Trump, are you going to vote for
a Libertarian
who may also not share your
values?
Their platform on issues, on
social issues
especially, is going to be far
to the left
from any conservative
Republicans. Their platform
on some fiscal issues may be too
far to the
right for some Democrats. This
is going to
be not an easy landing place for
a lot of
voters.
JOHN YANG: And like a lot of the
discussion
is about down-ballot candidates,
congressional
candidates, Senate candidates.
How much is
trying to affect the
presidential race? How
much of this is trying to give
small-government
conservatives that you were
talking about
earlier a reason to go to the
polls to vote
for other candidates?
TAMARA KEITH: I don't think that
the Libertarians
are trying to give them a
reason, but, certainly,
the never Trumps are looking for
something
to help these down-ballot
candidates.
And really down-ballots, Senate,
House, they
are working on it on their own.
You hear a
lot of members of Congress -- or
at least
some share, members of Congress,
saying, I
support the party's nominee. And
they don't
utter the name Donald Trump,
because they
don't want to get those
unfavorables to brush
off on them.
So, I think that there is a lot
of scrambling
right now trying to figure out
how they deal,
how these candidates deal with a
top of the
ticket that is wildly unpopular
with the next
six months that are inevitably
going to be
scorched earth from both Trump
and Clinton,
and how you do get people to
care, show up,
and vote.
AMY WALTER: And Donald Trump has
obviously
not shown much, I don't know,
shall we say,
he's not really magnanimous when
it comes
to people who say that they're
not going to
support him or have not been
full-throated
in their endorsement of him.
As we saw last week, he told --
made some
very unflattering statements
about the governor
of New Mexico, a Republican who
hasn't endorsed
him, and other Republicans who
haven't come
on board with him.
So, for these Republicans trying
to figure
out how do I not endorse him,
but stay with
him, distance myself, but not,
he's clearly
shown you that he's not going to
take that
lightly. If you don't show up to
an event
as elected official in the town
he's in that
you represent, he's probably
going to call
you out about that.
JOHN YANG: He essentially says,
I don't need
them.
AMY WALTER: Yes, I don't need
them, but I
would like to attack them
nonetheless.
JOHN YANG: Let's talk about the
Democrats.
Bernie Sanders is essentially
all in, in California.
Looks like he's not going to
leave the state
before the primary. Why? Why is
he doing this?
Why is he making this last stand
there?
AMY WALTER: I think the bottom
line is because
he can.
And, mathematically -- and
Tamara and I have
talked about this now for
months, about how
important the math is, the
delegate math.
Hillary Clinton is on track to
win the nomination.
She has pledged delegate
support. Remember,
the candidates that you win by
winning states,
54 percent of the pledged
delegates. She's
gotten 60 percent of the total
super, plus
pledged delegates.
She has a lead in the overall
popular vote.
Bernie Sanders would need to win
91 percent
of all the pledged and
superdelegates in order
to win. That's not going to
happen. But what
he's been able to do -- and I
think for all
the talk about all the
disruptions in this
campaign, this thing, this
smartphone has
been one of the biggest
disrupters, because,
normally, in the old days, a
candidate like
Bernie Sanders, who was
mathematically eliminated,
who lost lot of big states,
would run out
of money.
And he would have had to have
left the campaign
trail. Now he's able to raise
all of it online,
in small donations. He's also
able to organize
his volunteers and his
supporters with this
tool, with blogs and all of the
rest. That
has been the thing that has kept
Bernie Sanders
in this race.
JOHN YANG: And, Tamara, you just
were out
in California. What does it look
like on the
ground out there?
TAMARA KEITH: Certainly, both
candidates are
competing very hard.
Bernie Sanders, this weekend,
went to Visalia,
California, which is not a big
city. I think
it is down on the list of the
size of cities
in the California Central
Valley, which is
not the most populous part of
California.
He's going all over.
Hillary Clinton is also going,
was there.
She's going back. She is
spending a lot of
time there. This is not for
Hillary Clinton
or Bernie Sanders really about
winning the
nomination. This is about that
taste that
is left in people's mouths at
the very end
of the primary process.
For Hillary Clinton, if she were
to lose California
at the very end, she is likely
to have clinched
already in New Jersey or even
before that.
But it just leaves us sort of
like, ugh, OK,
it sucks the wind out, it takes
the momentum
away.
For Bernie Sanders, if he's
going to make
an argument to these
superdelegates that they
are completely wrong and they
shouldn't be
supporting Hillary Clinton, the
only thing
he's got is to be able to say,
look at the
most populous blue state in
America. I won
that state. That's what he is
fighting for
right now.
JOHN YANG: So, just like
Hollywood, California,
it's all about image and
perception.
TAMARA KEITH: Indeed.
JOHN YANG: OK, great.
Amy, Tamara, thanks a lot for
being with us.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": why
Latinos say
their economic and voting power
is underestimated;
the do's and don't's of creating
political
narratives; and the Armenian
genocide in poetry.
But first: a most unusual legal
case about
media ethics, responsibility and
a billionaire's
power.
It started with former wrestler
Hulk Hogan
suing Gawker Media for
publishing a video
of him having sex with a
friend's wife. A
jury awarded him $140 million
for invasion
of privacy.
Last week, we learned Hogan's
suit was by
Peter Thiel, one of the
co-founders of PayPal
and a major Silicon Valley
player. Thiel himself
was outed as a gay man by Gawker
Media nearly
a decade ago. That triggered a
critical public
letter from Gawker's co-founder,
Nick Denton.
He challenged Thiel to a public
debate, calling
him "a thin-skinned billionaire
with a vindictive
decade-long campaign quite out
of proportion
to the hurt you claim."
The case and the revelations
have sparked
big questions.
Hari Sreenivasan recently spoke
with Jason
Tanz, the editor at large of
"Wired."
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, let's go
over just basics
of what happened in this case,
because most
people aren't following Hulk
Hogan's sex tape
saga too closely.
JASON TANZ, "Wired": Sure.
So, a few years ago, Gawker
published an article
that included a video of a sex
tape that Hulk
Hogan had made, actually was
made without
his knowledge. They declared it
was in the
public interest because Hulk
Hogan was a public
figure and he had gone on record
talking about
how he had not had sex with this
woman, and
they had proof that he had. So
they published
it, somewhat gleefully, which
has always been
Gawker's kind of stock and
trade.
They have been very forward in
their -- in
what they declare to be in the
public interest.
And they thought this was. Hulk
Hogan didn't
see things that way. He brought
a lawsuit
against them. The jury found
against Gawker
to the tune of $140 million,
which was a pretty
shocking about.
Gawker has appealed the case and
they're waiting
to see how that plays out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how does
Peter Thiel
get involved in this? He --
there's no love
lost between the founder of
Gawker, Nick Denton,
and Peter Thiel.
JASON TANZ: Nick Denton had
suspected that
there was actually somebody
funding Hulk Hogan's
lawsuit, because the way Hogan
was prosecuting
the suit, he was making
decisions that, if
he were interested in making
money, game theory
suggests that he would have done
something
differently.
He could have taken reportedly
about a $10
million settlement. He also
withdrew a part
of the lawsuit that would have
required a
payout from Gawker's insurance.
They actually
just withdraw that, so that
Gawker would be
on the hook and not the
insurance company.
So, that indicated maybe there
was something
else going on. In 2007, Gawker
had -- and,
specifically, its site Valleywag
had outed
Peter Thiel as a gay man. Thiel
at the time
swore his revenge. And now, nine
years later,
he is getting it. He had a team
of lawyers
who were looking for various
plaintiffs who
could file suits that they could
fund, and
apparently they found more than
one. Supposedly,
there a couple of other suits
out there that
he's prepared to bring against
Gawker as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, nothing
that Peter
Thiel is doing is illegal. There
are not any
laws on the books that say you
can't fund
or aid someone else's legal
pursuit, right?
But there's a kind of a bigger
question here
of this is a billionaire using a
tremendous
amount of influence. He's an
ardent libertarian
who does speak up on behalf of
free speech,
but here he is crushing an
institution that
said something that he was,
well, ticked off
about.
JASON TANZ: Yes, I mean, the
tricky thing
about this is, Thiel feels
wronged, but he
is not suing Gawker based on the
statement
that he feels wronged him. He's
not suing
them for outing him.
He's suing them for Hogan. And
based on his
actions and based on Hogan's
actions, it doesn't
seem that is what is motivating
him is justice
for Hogan. It seems that what is
motivating
him is essentially crushing
Gawker through
the court system.
And there are a lot of people, a
lot of people
in the press in particular, who
see that and
get very, very scared, because
the point isn't
even necessarily to win the
suit. He can continue
to litigate against Gawker and
rack up huge
legal fees and destroy them even
if he never
wins a suit.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what does
the tech community
in Silicon Valley, how do they
feel about
this? On the one hand, there's
the journalism
question. On the other hand,
there is that
Peter Thiel is a smart guy and a
visionary
in this community.
JASON TANZ: Yes, there's been a
lot of defense
of Thiel within the tech
community.
Gawker is an easy media property
to hate.
And Valleywag in particular, for
those in
the tech industry, is a very
easy media property
to hate. They were glib, they
were cruel,
they were callous, and they had,
some would
say, pretty bad editorial
judgment a lot of
the time,
Like lot a First Amendment
cases, whether
that is Larry Flynt or Gawker,
it's very hard
to defend the specifics of this
particular
case. So, a lot of people within
Silicon Valley
are saying, look, this isn't any
different
from the ACLU or Greenpeace
funding suits
that they think are going to end
up having
a greater social good.
In this case, the greater social
good is punishing
and deterring people from
publishing the kind
of stuff that Gawker does. Now,
the concern,
of course, is who is to
determine what should
be punished? And even if we all
agree -- and
I'm not saying that we do -- but
even if we
all did agree that what Gawker
published shouldn't
have been published, by that
same logic, you
could say, I don't like the way
they're talking
about Theranos, and that's
really been unfair
to Theranos, and I think that
that has been
unfair and untoward and is
click-bait, and,
therefore, I'm going to punish
The Wall Street
Journal for publishing that.
It's one of those slippery slope
arguments
that you get into with these
First Amendment
disputes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Jason Tanz from
"Wired," thanks so much.
JASON TANZ: Yes, thanks for
having me.
JOHN YANG: Much of the focus on
Latinos throughout
this election cycle has centered
on the divisive
and often heated questions about
immigration
and its effects.
But now a bipartisan non-profit
group is trying
to change that. The Latino Donor
Collective
(sic), as it's known, wants to
emphasize the
growing economic power of
Latinos and the
potential force they can become.
I spoke with its co-founders,
Democrat Henry
Cisneros and Republican
businessman Sol Trujillo.
Cisneros was housing secretary
in the Clinton
administration.
Gentlemen, thanks for being with
us.
Mr. Cisneros, I would like to
start with you.
The two of you wrote an essay
for The Wall
Street Journal, and you said
that you have
been watching this presidential
campaign unfold
at first with disappointment,
then with concern
and now with real alarm. What is
alarming
you?
HENRY CISNEROS, Co-Founder,
Latino Donor Collaborative:
Well, what alarms me is that the
rhetoric
about Latinos seems to be giving
people permission
to denigrate this population, to
diminish
its place in American life. And
that's just
wrong.
This is a population of 55
million people,
growing to 100 million people.
It is essential
to the American future. It is
already making
a major contribution in many
areas of American
life, from religion to politics
to entrepreneurship
and to corporate business and as
consumers.
And one of the most important
areas is in
its contribution to the American
economy,
what Sol has come to call the
mainstream economy,
the mainstream American economy,
the next
American economy. And it's just
wrong to categorize
a people somehow as -- using
phrases related
to rapists and murderers and
freeloaders,
et cetera, to characterize an
entire population.
And someone needs to stand up
and say, let's
talk about the truth of this
population. And
it's role in American life.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trujillo, why are
the politicians
missing this? What aren't they
getting?
SOL TRUJILLO, Co-Founder, Latino
Donor Collaborative:
No one talking how we drive
growth, how we're
creating jobs, what's creating
jobs, what
is our upside in terms of the
economy.
And is where today we have a new
mainstream
economy driven predominantly by
Latinos in
growth. Let me give you some
quick statistics.
There's about a
trillion-and-a-half dollars
of spend by Latinos in this
country today,
growing at $80 billion to $90
billion per
year.
On top that, let's talk about
job creation
and what are drivers of domestic
GDP growth.
Think about housing. Think about
home purchases.
Over the last decade, 51 percent
of all new
home mortgages taken out in the
United States
of America have been taken out
by Latino families.
When you look at
entrepreneurship, in the
last half-decade, 86 percent of
all new business
formations in the United States,
based upon
a recent Hoover study
commissioned through
the Stanford Latino
Entrepreneurship Initiative,
shows that Latinos were creating
86 percent
of all new business formations.
Without Latinos in the mix, we
as a nation
would have had net negative
business formations.
And I can go on with more data,
John. But,
as an American, as somebody that
cares about
our economy, which all of us at
the Latino
Donor Collaborative do, we want
to make sure
that this story is understood,
rather than
mischaracterizations, incorrect
facts, which
will mislead policy decisions
that could be
very damaging to our economy.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Cisneros, you
talk about the
-- sort of the economic drivers
in the Latino
community. But at the same time,
there are
economic challenges to the
Latino community.
The BLS, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, says
that one in five Latinos is
working in a minimum
wage job, that unemployment
among Latinos
is higher than the national
average. Are there
still challenges among the --
for Latinos
in the economy?
HENRY CISNEROS: Oh, absolutely.
There are
huge challenges, many Latinos
working in underemployed
situations, undercompensated
situations.
And one of the biggest
challenges confronting
the Latino community is the need
to close
the gap in educational levels.
And we are.
We're making progress in terms
of lowering
the dropout rate, improving the
high school
graduation rate, improving the
acception to
college.
But one of the most dangerous
things about
the kind of rhetoric we're
seeing today is
that if it results in the
country failing
to recognize that it must invest
in Latinos,
and that Latinos are ambitious
and want to
avail themselves of education
and providing
the means to do that, then
there's a huge
opportunity cost for the United
States.
This is a population that is
large. In fact,
it's going to be 100 million
people by about
2040, 25 percent of the American
population.
It's already the largest
minority and the
fastest growing minority. The
swing can be
immense. Either it can be a
large population
that is a drag on American
society because
it is not receiving the proper
education and
proper investment, or it can be
truly one
of the absolute drivers, one of
the engines
of opportunity for the American
future, without
a doubt.
JOHN YANG: How can you get the
political power
to match the demographic power
and the economic
power? In 20 -- the last
presidential election,
only 47 percent of Latinos
registered to vote
voted.
How can you improve that
turnout?
SOL TRUJILLO: Well, John, let's
look at results
first before we get into the
what I call misleading
statistical analysis.
If you look at the last
election, one of the
big conclusions of the
Republican Party was
that the reason why they lost
was because
of the fact that they didn't get
the Latino
vote. If you look at the prior
election, same
conclusion, and the one before
that, until
you look back at George W. Bush,
and you look
at Ronald Reagan, who both were
able to get
over 40 percent of the Latino
vote.
Well, guess what? The base of
the Latino vote,
the percentage of total voters
as Latinos
has only gotten bigger. So, I
call it basic
elementary math. Then you have
to understand
the basic math. We can talk
about 47 percent
voter rates or we can talk about
42 and talk
about those numbers, but the
base is just
getting bigger.
And that's the reality. There's
almost a million
young Latinos turning 18 every
year; 93 percent
of them are native-born. And
it's dramatically
changing what we would call the
base, the
voter base, those who are going
to be active
in politics, and while at the
same time, other
groups are actually in decline
as a percentage
of total. It's just math.
JOHN YANG: Sol Trujillo, Henry
Cisneros, trying
to change the discussion about
Latinos in
America, thanks for joining us.
HENRY CISNEROS: Thank you for
the opportunity.
SOL TRUJILLO: Thank you, John.
JOHN YANG: The group that Mr.
Cisneros and
Mr. Trujillo have started is the
Latino Donor
Collaborative.
JOHN YANG: And next: the latest
addition to
our "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
It's a personal narrative on the
importance
that visuals play in making or
breaking a
political campaign or a White
House event.
Judy Woodruff sat down with
author Josh King
to discuss the significance of
imagery in
the age of optics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Political
stagecraft has evolved
into a high form of art. But
that doesn't
mean mishaps don't take place
along the campaign
trail or on the road with the
president.
We turn now to Josh King. He is
the author
of "Off Script: An Advance Man's
Guide to
White House Stagecraft, Campaign
Spectacle,
and Political Suicide."
Josh King, welcome to the
"NewsHour."
JOSH KING, Author, "Off Script:
Thanks, Judy.
Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, first of all,
what is an
advance man?
JOSH KING: An advance man is
basically a political
movie producer.
We roam the hustings of America
and around
the world trying to tell
political stories
by setting up tableaus that
connect a president
or a presidential candidate with
the places
they are or the people that
they're interacting
with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were there
for some of
the most memorable moments of
the last several
Democratic political leaders in
this country,
Michael Dukakis, when he ran for
president,
Bill Clinton.
But you make a wonderful point
of saying the
mistakes are where the people
learn, someone
in your job learns. And you
write beautifully
about what happened to Michael
Dukakis. Tell
that story.
JOSH KING: Dukakis was down in
Michigan. He
was down in the summer of 1988,
and he had
to go and into a General
Dynamics land systems
plant and ride M1-A1 Abrams tank
to try and
look like a more credible
commander in chief.
But the tank didn't fit him, and
it showed
that day, and then in the
commercial that
Sig Rogich made five weeks later
and put on
the air on behalf of the
Bush-Quayle campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On behalf of the
Republicans.
And it's interesting, because
you point out
Michael Dukakis had served in
the military,
been in Korea, in the U.S. Army,
but he still
didn't -- this picture didn't
work. What is
-- how do you know what works
for a candidate
or for a president? What is a
setting that's
going to work?
JOSH KING: Well, it has to fit
who he is.
And as much as Dukakis had come
out of Swarthmore
and was drafted into the Army
and served in
Korea after the armistice, his
persona and
his executive experience was
based much more
on his life in Massachusetts, a
competent
administrator, a person who
could get things
done.
He wasn't running to be a
commander in chief.
He was running on the economy.
He would have
been much better in a hospital
setting or
in a school, where he could
point to so many
things in his record that
matched who he was.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are other
images. You
were there for Bill Clinton. And
you shared
some images that are -- pictures
that are
in the book. You shared with us
just today
a picture of Bill Clinton
surrounded by a
swarm of gnats. What happened?
JOSH KING: Well, they sent me to
Lyon, France.
It was the G7 Summit.
And so much of that happens
indoors around
a big conference table. I wanted
to show him
in a little more bucolic setting
to show that
he was really enjoying his
European trip.
And the heat was growing. It was
one of the
hottest days of the year. And a
swarm of gnats
was forming around the
presidential podium.
So I go into a store, and I buy
what I think
is insect repellent. I can't
really read the
French writing on it. But I
spray it all over
the podium. Turns it out it was
insect killer.
And because it was so hot and
the movie lights
that we trained on the president
to even out
the shadows for the TV shot was
-- were making
him sweat.
He got his hands on the podium.
And the questioning
was withering and he's starting
to rub his
eyes. And before this news
conference is over,
he's almost poisoned in his
eyes. He can't
-- can hardly open them as he's
answering
questions about the Middle East.
It was a disaster for him and
for me that
day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the other
scenes you
write about memorably, Josh
King, is what
happened to President Bush when
he went out
on the aircraft carrier at the
end of -- what
people thought was the end of
the Iraq War.
JOSH KING: Right.
It's May 1, 2003, the end of
combat operations
in Iraq. And to declare the end
of combat
operations, President Bush takes
an S-3 Viking
from San Diego to the deck of
the USS Abraham
Lincoln in the Pacific Ocean.
And when he gives his speech to
the nation
later on, now dressed in a blue
suit, does
this beautiful walk out from the
tower of
the carrier and comes to stage,
perfectly
positioned and behind him is a
banner that
says "Mission Accomplished."
And if you heard the White
House's original
explanation and the ship's,
those two words,
"Mission Accomplished," were for
the crew
of the Lincoln, which had
completed the longest
deployment of any aircraft
carrier since the
end of the Vietnam War.
But the White House was the team
that put
that banner exactly where it
was, positioned
perfectly for a live national TV
shot. And
I declared that day it was a
great event in
all respects, but they didn't
need those two
words, because that's what
dogged Bush for
so many years after that event.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you
explain -- if you
are working with a candidate or
a president
who says, wait a minute, I
thought this was
all on the level, I thought -- I
thought serving
the country was about policy
positions and
about substance, you're telling
me it's about
optics, what do you say?
JOSH KING: To win any particular
primary or
general election and take home
electoral votes
in certain states, it's going go
to be covered
by local newspapers, by local
television,
by national television.
And what they need is imagery to
fill their
packages, and we need to provide
the content
that you, frankly, edit in and
present as
what happened that day in such a
boiled-down
fashion in two minutes. You get
-- Bill Clinton
or Donald Trump or Hillary
Clinton can't get
their policy ideas across in two
minutes.
So we feed the way the system
works.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, finally, as
you know very
well, what we're dealing with
today is a much
faster news environment.
JOSH KING: Yes. Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pictures are
taken all around.
A president can be photographed
in so many
more ways or a candidate. How
much harder
does that make the job?
JOSH KING: Infinitely harder.
I call 2004 the high watermark
of the age
of optics, because after that,
Facebook, Twitter,
YouTube took over. And we're
flooded with
so much, Judy, that perhaps
there's not staying
power of any great picture or
any negative
picture for more than a few
hours or a news
cycle or two.
And what I think is the most
powerful thing
that President Obama was able to
do last year
was that hour-long podcast with
Marc Maron
that he calls "WTF." And in
that, when you
remove the visual entirely, and
you just hear
what the president says for 60
minutes, and
almost have this conversation in
your head,
let him say in long form what he
needs to,
I had a much better appreciation
for Barack
Obama after that than, frankly,
seven years
of televised coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're
saying, after all
this effort to get the picture
right, the
picture may not matter?
JOSH KING: My epiphany was that
perhaps the
words are more important.
And we need to do better job
listening and
creating content and allowing
people to have
a longer conversation. We don't
have all that
time on broadcast or commercial
television,
but there are new mediums coming
through where
we can understand what people
have to say
a lot better.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Josh King, thank
you very much.
"Off Script: An Advance Man's
Guide to White
House Stagecraft, Campaign
Spectacle, and
Political Suicide."
We appreciate it.
JOSH KING: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Now: how a writer is
coming to
terms with his family's own
traumatic past,
and how his use of poetry's
distinct style
helps him grapple with history.
Jeffrey Brown has our profile.
And we should warn you, viewers
may find some
of the images disturbing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Peter Balakian
grew up amid
the security and postwar
economic boom of
New Jersey's suburban American
life. He played
football and worked as a stock
boy in Manhattan.
He also early on became a reader
and writer
of poetry.
PETER BALAKIAN, Pulitzer Prize
Winner: "The
day comes in strips of yellow
glass over trees.
When I tell you the day is a
poem, I'm only
talking to you and only the sky
is listening."
JEFFREY BROWN: It would lead to
encounters
with the likes of Allen Ginsberg
and over
the years seven collections. The
latest, "Ozone
Journal," just won the Pulitzer
Prize.
But from his grandmother
beginning at an early
age, Balakian heard occasional
hints of a
darker family history set in
Armenia. And
he began to explore a past that
remains fought
over to this day, the expulsion
and killing
of 1.5 million Armenians by the
Ottoman Turks.
Many members of Balakian's
family died. Others,
like his grandmother and aunts,
survived after
a horrific flight on foot.
Balakian would write about these
events in
history titled "The Burning
Tigris" and in
a family memoir, "Black Dog of
Fate."
PETER BALAKIAN: One of the
reasons for my
writing "Black Dog of Fate" was
to try to
make sense of growing up in a
family in which
a traumatic history was really
repressed.
It wasn't spoken about. It was
silenced.
And yet the leakages that I
experienced as
a kid growing up in affluent
suburbia were
beguiling and weird and strange,
and they
stayed with me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Leakages as in
like little
hints or stories, things you
would over hear?
PETER BALAKIAN: Sure, things I
would overhear,
even my grandmother's kind of
weird dreams
and folk tales which would drift
on to me.
You pick up things and you
didn't know where
to put them. They were almost
deracinated.
So, in adult life I came to look
back at those
-- at those fragments and
encoded messages
of a traumatic history. And it
really drove
me, in part at least, to work on
what became
a memoir, a coming of age story.
JEFFREY BROWN: And how did it
work with poetry?
Were you discovering poetry at
the same time
you were sort of discovering
this history?
PETER BALAKIAN: Poetry came
first.
It was an immersion for me as a
college student
in the early 1970s. I began
writing poems
with a kind of passion, and I
never stopped.
I was working my way as a young
guy in his
20s writing lyric poems. And
around the mid
to late 1970s, for various
reasons, the news
of history started percolating
in me.
And I started understanding more
of the big
picture of my own family's
historical experience
as genocide survivors. The poem
in its unique
form, its form of compressed
language and
particular kinds of probe
images, I like to
call them, or incisive,
compressed image language,
is capable of going to history
and its aftermath
in ways that no other literary
form can.
"Who drowned waiting in the
reeds of the Ararat
plain? There, the sky is
cochineal. There,
the chapel windows open to raw
umber and twisted
goats. There, the obsidian
glistens and the
hawks eat out your eyes."
JEFFREY BROWN: Many Armenians,
including Balakian's
grandmother, fled into what is
today Syria.
Most were killed or starved to
death along
the way.
PETER BALAKIAN: As many as
450,000 Armenians
died here.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2009, just
before the civil
war began, Balakian joined a "60
Minutes"
crew in Syria for a report on
their fate.
PETER BALAKIAN: Evidence comes
in many forms.
It comes in photographs, it
comes in texts
and telegrams. And it also comes
in bone.
It was extraordinary then to be
there. Looking
back at it now, I feel like it's
a dream.
But for me, it was also exciting
to be there,
because there's a very rich
Armenian culture
and community in Aleppo and a
gorgeous church.
And so all that was a kind of
connecting with
a diasporan culture.
And then when the war started,
when the war
began to just destroy all of
this, I would
look on, on the screens and on
the TV images
and the computer images with
pain and disbelief
that, just in the little case of
Armenian
cultural life there, churches
that were hundreds
of years old were gone. Whole
communities
were disbanded.
And if that was true just for
the smaller
Armenian population of Syria, we
all knew
what was happening to the broad
Syrian population.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Peter
Balakian,
congratulations. Thank you.
PETER BALAKIAN: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Now an ode to
desserts.
Daniel Boulud is a James Beard
Award-winning
chef with restaurants around the
world. Tonight,
he celebrates a meal's sweet
spot, dessert,
and explains why we should never
go without.
Here's an encore look.
DANIEL BOULUD, Chef: A meal is a
crescendo.
And the crescendo wouldn't be
complete without
DANIEL BOULUD, Chef: A meal is a
crescendo.
And the crescendo wouldn't be
complete without
the dessert.
The last impression I think you
want to leave,
a long lingering, sort of,
dreamy feel of
the end of a meal. And I think
dessert, it
energizes you, the sugar. I
think you get
a little bit of the sugar rush.
WOMAN: The best part of it is
you soak it
in a lot of rum.
DANIEL BOULUD: That's Ghaya, our
pastry chef.
So, right now, we're doing a
baba au rhum.
It's an old classic dessert
where it's maybe
not a children-driven dessert,
but, you know,
once you start to grow up, you
love baba au
rhum because that's the only
chance you have
to have a little bit of alcohol
in your dessert.
And for us, we take this classic
idea of the
baba au rhum, but we make a
delicate baba,
which is soaked in an aged white
rum, 3-years-old
white rum with vanilla. And then
we have pistachio,
a crust of pistachio on top.
And we serve that with a
pistachio whip cream,
and the crunch of the little
pistachio, and
then on the side, also, is a
salad of citrus,
so there's grapefruit, there is
orange, there
is a little bit of kumquat
confit in sugar
and all that.
So the citrus is there to sort
of play with
the rum, play with the baba,
cool off a little
bit the rum. The cream is there
to give richness
to either the baba or the
citrus. And the
sweet together, it's still a
very light, refreshing
dessert, and yet a very classic
French baba
au rhum.
Dessert is very artistic.
Dessert is sort
of an expression of art in a
very natural
way and in a very sort of
decadent way as
well. In cooking, yes, it's a
little bit more
like jazz, I mean, where you can
jam a little
bit. You can take -- you can be
spontaneous.
With pastry, it, I think, goes a
little bit
more like classical music. The
repertoire
is set, and it's a question of
just creating
the layers of intensity. The
texture, we respect
the taste. I don't think dessert
is really
the problem in a diet of people.
You have to eat dessert with
moderation, but
I think it's important to
continue to keep
yourself and your soul happy
with a bit of
sweetness. And I'm having
chocolate every
night at home. I have always bar
of chocolate.
And I break a little piece, and
I suck on
slowly and feel like, ah, that's
so good.
OK, that chocolate, maybe we
should do something
with it tomorrow.
JOHN YANG: Later tonight this
Memorial Day
on PBS, a "POV" documentary
about post-traumatic
stress disorder and its haunting
effects on
veterans.
"Of Men and War" follows
veterans and their
families over a nine-year
period, focusing
on one residential treatment
center in California.
In this clip, men back from Iraq
and Afghanistan
are dealing with the difficulty
of adjusting
to civilian life, and frequent
problems with
anger and frustration.
MAN: I'm having trouble waking
up, like, just
completely livid. And I'm just,
I don't want
to even deal with this. So,
sometimes, I just
stay up for three days and fall
asleep on
whatever day I drop asleep.
MAN: A lot of times, I find
myself thinking
things, and I say it out loud,
and everybody
looks at me like I'm just like
evil or like
insensitive.
And it's like, no, I didn't mean
it in an
insensitive way. It's just like
get yourself
-- sometimes, you're sitting
there racking
my nine, and, you know, not like
I'm contemplating
anything, just bored and just
pondering everything.
I really just don't feel like I
fit in anywhere,
like at all.
MAN: The reality is, you
definitely need to
be in therapy, because that's
where you're
going to be able to bounce
things off of somebody
and you just got to let other
people help
you to get there.
MAN: Thank you. He's here. The
madness ends.
MAN: Let's focus up here. You
have war-zone-related
issues. And being hostage to the
war zone
is not having a life. This is
where you finally
stop running away.
Questions? Thoughts?
MAN: I'm concerned someone is
going to have
their opinion or give me some
kind of (EXPLETIVE
DELETED) whether they mean to or
not, primarily
Brooks, because he sometimes
looks evil when
he's not trying to. You know
what I'm saying?
MAN: He's the devil.
MAN: You know what I mean? Like,
giving people
like -- think I'm looking at him
like I'm
talking (EXPLETIVE DELETED)
angry or something.
When I'm talking about my
(EXPLETIVE DELETED)
just take one thing to set me
off, and I will
(EXPLETIVE DELETED) lose
(EXPLETIVE DELETED)
my cool. I don't want to
do that.
MAN: But that's your stuff. And
that's why
it's good for you to be in a
group.
The group's purpose is to bear
witness to
your sharing of yourself. You
might not ever
share this stuff again.
JOHN YANG: "Of Men and War" airs
tonight on
most PBS stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
John Yang.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.